>> Jason Pamental: We're gonna get
into a little bit of typography 101,
responsive typography.
What exactly are variable fonts and
what's the status of them, and
when can we start playing around?
Performance, proportion, polish, all
aspects of implementing web fonts well.
And then I've got some really new stuff.
And that's the part that I'm really
excited about for people who are really
into what are the latest things
in front end and HTML and CSS.
And we're gonna not just
play with variables, but
we're going to with variable fonts.
We're gonna use CSS variables.
We're gonna use calculation.
We're gonna do some pretty
cool stuff that I think you'll
agree when you see it all together, adds
up to way more than the sum of its parts.
And there's a lot of really interesting
things coming along in the world of
CSS that really gives us a tremendous
amount of control and flexibility.
And then again try to look at some of
those finer details, and different ideas
that we can bring to the project to create
a greater sense of differentiation,
both in visual hierarchy on the page but
also between what you're working on and
what anything else looks
like that we see on the web.
So responsive typography in a nutshell.
When I wrote the book, there
are really sorta four main areas that
I wanted to focus on, performance
really being one of the most important.
And I say it's the most
important not because,
as a designer, I think it's more
important than the aesthetics,
but it's the objection that keeps us
from using fonts in the first place.
So if we don't deal with performance
then we don't get to play
around with the design.
And that's understandable because you
don't really have a lot of time before
people bail.
And so, we don't wanna introduce any
barriers to content getting on screen.
And we also wanna think about
not just what you're loading and
how much but how you're loading it.
Because that can make a big difference
if you worked a lot with JavaScript,
you know that there's defer, there's
async, there's different strategies
that you can put in place to make sure
that the content can render quickly and
then other stuffs comes in.
And that's just a natural part of the web.
I wanna make sure that we embrace that.
We also wanna ensure that we're
not leaving devices behind.
So we're talking about really cutting
edge stuff with variable fonts, but
even just web fonts themselves.
There are about 400 million Opera Mini
devices in the world that don't support
web fonts at all.
You also have the condition
of web fonts not being
supported because you're on the subway,
because you're out in the country.
For me, if I'm on the commuter rail
between Providence and Boston,
there's at least three or four places
where a signal drops out entirely.
So if you haven't implemented
web fonts correctly,
someone might not get content at all.
So we wanna make sure that we
embrace flash on style text.
In fact, we lean into that and
consider that the standard.
That's actually what we want and there's
a few different ways that we can help
trigger that in order to get
the content on screen but do so
in a way that will still
provide a solid experience.
Proportion is a big thing.
This actually was one of the most central
elements to my book when I kind of
rejiggered the whole thing around
this notion of responsive typography.
You don't need to have a heading as big
as you would have it on the desktop on
a small screen, it's really ungainly, it's
hard to read, it wraps really poorly and
you still just need hierarchy, it just
doesn't need to be as exaggerated, so
on a small screen, we wanna make sure that
we scale the proportion of headings and
body copy.
And then make sure it still works well and
gets the attention it needs
once you get back to a big one.
I really like the phrase
design is the details.
Because there are lots of
frameworks out there and
this is not to pick on Bootstrap but
if you simply create a site, pull in
the Bootstrap library, you will have
a reasonably competent looking project.
I mean that's fair, and
it's not necessarily what I
think of as great design but
it brings everything up
on an even playing field.
It keeps thing in a sort
of an orderly manner.
Things will reflow pretty well, but it's
not the details that will set it apart.
There are 1 million other sites out
there that look just like Bootstrap
out of the box.
So that's not a good way to
differentiate what your work.
So we're gonna concentrate on what are
the small details that will really start
to set your work apart.
So those things taken together, I think
are kind of at the heart of what I'm
referring to when I say
responsive typography.
And we'll get a chance to see
how the type plays into that.
But this is a little precursor to
getting into performance, and
this is still a pretty common thing.
That screen on the right
sometimes is what people see for
5, 10, 15 seconds, on a slow network
connection waiting for web fonts to load.
And then, finally, you get content.
You'll notice the one on the left, you
could read the whole time, because it was
set up so that it would automatically
go to the fallback font right away, and
then flip over to the web
fonts once they load it.
So it's not blocking page render and
it's not blocking the user
from interacting with content.
So those are the kinds of things
that we want to lean into.
Now, for
what I was talking about with proportion,
if we look at this design here,
you can see that that top level heading,
A Whale of a Tale,
is quite a bit larger than body copy.
But if you look at that on tablet and
then on the phone,
it's proportionally getting smaller, but
it's still very clear what the most
important piece of information is.
So that's what I'm talking about
looking at the proportion and
creating this sorta sliding
scale that will ensure that you
still have the appropriate level of
importance that's being conveyed.
It's an H1, it's supposed to be the most
important thing on the page, but
you wanna make sure that it's not huge,
pushing everything down and out of
the way, wrapping poorly, breaking words.
Those kinds of things I see all the time,
even today.
I mean this is not new.
I wrote about this five years ago.
And there's still a lot of people
that haven't really thought this all
the way through.
As a matter of fact, looking at
styleguides.io, which is a great resource
for looking at design systems, I found
two design systems on the first page or
two of results that actually had a type
system that scaled with screen size.
And these are very large corporations.
So it's still something that is not on the
minds of everybody that it needs to be.
So when you are thinking
through a design system,
that's the perfect time to think through,
how old this moving scale,
because if you fix it there then it gets
fixed everywhere you apply that system.
So it's really important
to keep that stuff in mind.
Now there's lots of interesting
techniques that we can do with CSS that
really draw strong parity
with what we can do in print.
Large initial capitals,
breaking things into columns.
Making sure that things reflow
nicely when the screen gets smaller.
It's an interesting thing right now.
We can actually achieve more
typographically on the web
in some cases than we can in print.
Especially with variable funds because we
can actually take advantage of that stuff
far more easily in print than in most
applications for a desktop right now and
there's some really interesting things
about fine typographic details that
are just not possible with any
other technology right now.
The future of this is stuff that
we're going to look at today, and
then it's some stuff that you can use,
and some things that are coming.
And we'll look at ways that you can start
to integrate that into how you're working,
so you can do this in a sorta safe and
production ready manner.
Variable fonts,
more modern elements in CSS.
We're gonna look at even more interesting
things that are coming along with
performance.
And really kinda getting beyond just the
basics of dropping in a line of CSS and
forgetting about it.